So you, if it's fair to say you, it seems like you're writing,
like one of the, one of the ways you collect data is almost like you're
reporting on these people. Like you're,
you're collecting real life interactions between people and real
life characteristics, and then you incorporate them into fiction.
Exactly.
That's fair to say. My degree is journalism.
I have no idea how to be with people.
So I need to introduce a topic and see if it resonates and then
get everybody's take on these common experiences and then pick the very best
one. So in a way,
basically what I'm doing is kind of an ongoing field study that becomes
whatever my next book is.
When you wrote fight club,
you tapped into something that w it was really fascinating for me as someone
who's been involved in martial arts my whole life.
And I kind of understood the cathartic release of
violence, but I never saw it articulated the way you did.
And you made it enticing for a thinking person.
You made it like you would, you did it, you, you sort of opened up these,
uh, these doors of understanding for someone who may be
maybe had frustration or had some pent up rage, or had some,
some angst that just was not going to get out any other way.
And then you wrote about it. And then when you wrote,
you were reading what you wrote a bank made you go. Yeah. Okay. Oh, all right.
Now it's like, you,
you added an element to it that really didn't exist before in pop culture.
It was really fascinating for me, as a,
as someone who's watching that whole thing,
unfurl and watching people get like really resonating with people,
watching people really getting excited about your work. It's like, oh, he,
he hit some nerve that nobody really hit before.
All right. And it's not a nerve that gets hit very much, you know? And it, it,
there's so many different aspects to it.
And one is just my classic thing is that there are so few social model
novels or stories for men, for, for women. There are, uh,
you know, every season, there's a new joy luck club,
a new how to make an American quilt, a new traveling sisterhood of the Yamaha,
whatever,
just all these different models in which women can come together and talk about
their lives. And if you're a man you've got either fight club,
or you have the dead poet society. And that is really it.
So we don't have a lot of narratives that, that depict to men,
a role or a kind of script in which to come together and talk about
their, their shed. Another thing is, uh,
Jordan Peterson, back to Jordan Peterson.
He talks about that need for really rough play.
And he talks it a lot. And a lot of my friends, they, they,
they brag about how badly their kids hurt them. Oh my gosh,
my daughter came at me the other day. I had no idea how strong she was.
She pulled my arm out of the socket, and they're proud.
They're proud that their kid can play that rough in his growing up that strong.
But, you know,
we've kind of fallen away from this idea of consensual rough play.
And I think fight club resonated with that a lot.
And also the idea of Joseph Campbell's idea that there needs to be a
secondary father in men's lives that you're born.
If you're lucky with a biological father that you do not choose,
and that is the nurturing,
loving father that you eventually kind of have to reject, but in doing so,
you have to choose a new father.
And that that father by choice typically is, uh,
a minister or a teacher or a drill Sergeant or a coach,
one of those fathers.
And you kind of put yourself in apprenticeship to the secondary father,
and you have to sort of consign your life to the secondary father and agree to
learn what they're going to teach you, uh, just like in karate kid.
And that is getting harder and harder and harder to find.
So fight club was also depicting a new form of the secondary father with all
these,
these kids that were showing up on the doorstep of this ramshackle old house.
So there was just so many aspects of men's lives that were not being
addressed when fight club came out and it sort of reinvented so many of those
things that had fallen by the wayside.
That's a huge part of martial arts.
A huge part of martial arts is your relationship with the master,
with the coach, with finding someone who can guide you through the,
the most dangerous waters, uh, of competition that it's,
it's absolutely imperative that bad relationships with coaches are absolutely
disastrous. And it it's,
it's imperative that someone find the right coach find someone who they,
they really can trust and appreciate.
And you do develop it's so such a common theme.
They talk about this person being like a son or this person being like a father,
you know, I mean, it's, um, it's, uh, I, I never thought about it that way.
I forgot about that part of Joseph Campbell, but yeah, that is a huge,
huge issue with, with young men and, um,
young men getting into martial arts is something that I've talked about so many
times I don't discuss it as the need for rough play. I say,
there's human reward systems that are just not being, did not being met.
And that systems that have been in place for thousands and thousands of years
that are designed to reward us for fighting off the enemy,
running away from danger or developing physical skills and having
a body that's capable of,
of not just a physical activity, but violence.
Well, and, and beyond just that, you know,
it's also the whole idea apprenticeship in a,
whether you're apprenticing yourself to a fighting coach or to a metallurgist or
to a welder or to a brick layer or to a Mason,
you are apprenticing yourself to somebody that you're going to do all this grunt
work for, but in exchange, you're going to,
you're going to learn that kind of really master skill at something.
And so it's a way of mastering yourself as you master
this other thing. So, you know, it,
it's not just always a physical, you know, fighting thing.
It doesn't have to be in that form.
Just difficult, something that's a struggle, something that's hard to learn,
right? Yeah.
And that relationship that you have with that secondary father too,
it's almost in some ways more intense, the, the,
the pride of someone teaching you something,
and then you eventually developing those skills.
And then this person who is teaching you,
this being proud of your work is extremely satisfactory.
Well, and do you remember officer and a gentleman? Yeah. You know,
Richard Gere really has this drunken dis not their dad.
And then he has this drill Sergeant who's constantly trying to wash them out.
And then finally he reaches it at the existential crisis of saying,
you can't throw me out of the service because I have no nothing else.
I have nowhere else to go in the world. My life will amount to nothing,
unless I can master this thing. And he said a relatively young man,
but it is that existentialist moment where you,
you realize that you have to sacrifice your youth for something you're
not going to live forever.
It's a very Martin Heidegger moment where you realize you have to become a
being living towards death. You're not going to live forever.
And you've got to give your life to something.
Now, when you approach a novel like that, when you have a story like that,
that's brewing your head, how do you decide what to pull the trigger on? Like,
do you just go on instinct? Did you just have a concept in your head?
And it just seems more and more attractive and you just say, okay, this is it.
You know,
one really good test is if you can take it to a party and you can tell a very
small part of it, as much of it, as, you know, at that point,
and people will Vive for a chance
to relate some aspect of their life. That is very much like that,
but an even more extreme example of that. So in a way, they're,
they're flushing out your theme with parts of their own lives.
And so you find yourself drawing from the experience of dozens or hundreds or
thousands of people. And at the same time, you're beta testing it,
you're kind of taking it on the road.
And you're seeing that it's an idea that resonates,
resonates with a huge number of people that everyone can relate to it.
Hmm.
That's interesting.
So do you purposely let go to parties with like a couple like bullets in the
chamber.
Sometimes,
or sometimes just go to the party and I listen to hear somebody tell that that
personal anecdote that does evoke all those other anecdotes,
because a great anecdote doesn't leave people speechless.
It leaves them competing to tell a better version of the same thing.
And that's when a real writer just starts realizing, okay,
there's a pattern and that can be turned into something really big.
That's really interesting. There's a parallel there with comedy.